Add the simple diffusion model tutorial (#83)
jax-ml/jax-ai-stack: docs/digits_diffusion_model.md

---

> jupytext:

Reviewer: There should be a `formats` entry here. Did you sync the ipynb and md sources? https://jax-ai-stack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/contributing.html#adding-a-new-notebook

Reviewer: This is important becuase otherwise the `md` and `ipynb` may have mismatched content.

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.16.4
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  name: python3
---

+++ {"id": "Kzqlx7fpXRnJ"}

# Image generation in JAX: a simple diffusion model

[![Open in Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/jax-ml/jax-ai-stack/blob/main/docs/digits_diffusion_model.ipynb)

In [Debugging in JAX: a Variational autoencoder (VAE) model](https://colab.research.google.com/github/jax-ml/jax-ai-stack/blob/main/docs/digits_vae.ipynb) you explored a simplified version of a [Variational Autoencoder (VAE)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Variational_autoencoder) trained on the simple digits data. In this tutorial you will find the steps to develop, train and perform inferences with a simple diffusion model developed with JAX, Flax, NNX and Optax. It includes:
- preparing the dataset
- Developing the custom diffusion model
- Creating the loss and training functions

> - Perform the model training using Colab TPU v2 as a hardware accelerator

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Perform the model training using Colab TPU v2 as a hardware accelerator
- Visualizing and tracking your model progress.
```

  height: 303
id: jNizSH6uuXY4
outputId: 112723a1-fd36-46b2-946d-6d789f5a33ed
---
# Data preprocessing
digits = load_digits()
images = digits.images[digits.target == 1] # Filter images of digit '1'
images = images / 16.0 # Normalize pixel values to [0, 1]
images = jnp.asarray(images) # Convert to JAX array
images = images.reshape(-1, 8, 8, 1) # Reshape to (num_images, height, width, channels)

# Split the dataset
images_train, images_test = train_test_split(images, test_size=0.05, random_state=42)
print(f"Training set size: {images_train.shape[0]}")
print(f"Test set size: {images_test.shape[0]}")

# Visualize sample images
fig, axes = plt.subplots(3, 3, figsize=(3, 3))
for i, ax in enumerate(axes.flat):
    if i < len(images_train):
        ax.imshow(images_train[i, ..., 0], cmap='gray', interpolation='gaussian')
        ax.axis('off')
plt.show()
```

+++ {"id": "exKxj9OcG0yk"}

## Building your diffusion model

Now you will start developing the parts of your [diffusion model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffusion_model). It if composed of the backbone part in a (UNet architecture)[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/U-Net] and the diffusion layers.

> ## U-Net Architecture

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### U-Net Architecture
```

        self.attention2 = self._create_attention_block(features * 8, rngs)

        # Bridge connecting encoder and decoder
        self.bridge_down = self._create_residual_block(features * 8, features * 16, rngs)
        self.bridge_attention = self._create_attention_block(features * 16, rngs)
        self.bridge_up = self._create_residual_block(features * 16, features * 16, rngs)

        # Decoder path with skip connections
        self.up_conv4 = self._create_residual_block(features * 24, features * 8, rngs)
        self.up_conv3 = self._create_residual_block(features * 12, features * 4, rngs)
        self.up_conv2 = self._create_residual_block(features * 6, features * 2, rngs)
        self.up_conv1 = self._create_residual_block(features * 3, features, rngs)

        # Output layers
        self.final_norm = nnx.LayerNorm(features, rngs=rngs)
        self.final_conv = nnx.Conv(in_features=features,
                                 out_features=out_channels,
                                 kernel_size=(3, 3),
                                 strides=(1, 1),
                                 padding=((1, 1), (1, 1)),
                                 rngs=rngs)

>     def _create_attention_block(self, channels: int, rngs: nnx.Rngs) -> Callable:

Author: Hi @vfdev-5 - It is possible, but I preferred to create everything as close to "from scratch" as possible.

    # Progressive timestep sampling - weights early steps more heavily as training progresses
    # This helps model focus on fine details in later epochs while maintaining stability
    progress = epoch / num_epochs
    t_weights = jnp.linspace(1.0, 0.1 * (1.0 - progress), num_steps)
    t = jax.random.choice(
        subkey1,
        num_steps,
        shape=(images_train.shape[0],),
        p=t_weights/t_weights.sum()
    )

    # Generate Gaussian noise for current batch
    noise = jax.random.normal(subkey2, images_train.shape)

    # Execute training step with noise prediction and parameter updates
    loss = train_step(
        model, optimizer, images_train, t, noise,
        diffusion.sqrt_alpha_cumulative, diffusion.sqrt_one_minus_alpha_cumulative
    )

    # Update exponential moving average of loss for smoother tracking
    if moving_avg_loss is None:
        moving_avg_loss = loss
    else:
        moving_avg_loss = beta * moving_avg_loss + (1 - beta) * loss

    losses.append(moving_avg_loss)

    # Log training progress at regular intervals
    if epoch % 100 == 0:
        print(f"Epoch {epoch}, Loss: {moving_avg_loss:.4f}")

print("\nTraining completed.")
```

> +++ {"id": "SHX69WgxKUs7"}
> 
> 
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

+++ {"id": "s-iqch4HKlBV"}

> ## Training loss visualization

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Training loss visualization
```

> It uses a logarithmic scale to better display the exponential decay of the loss values over time. This representation helps identify both early rapid improvements and later fine-tuning phases of the training process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We use a logarithmic scale to better display the exponential decay of the loss values over time. This representation helps identify both early rapid improvements and later fine-tuning phases of the training process.
```

Author: As in the common Google tech writing guideline, I do prefer to keep it without the "We language".

```{code-cell}
---
colab:
  base_uri: https://localhost:8080/
  height: 487
id: 1bjvWNCcbN24
outputId: 457fd13f-377f-4021-ddc2-e36940b42550
---
# Plot the training loss history with logarithmic scaling
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 5))            # Create figure with wide aspect ratio for clarity
plt.plot(losses)                       # losses: List[float] - historical EMA loss values
plt.title('Training Loss Over Time')
plt.xlabel('Epoch')
plt.ylabel('Loss')
plt.yscale('log')                      # Use log scale to better visualize exponential decay
plt.grid(True)                         # Add grid for easier value reading
plt.show()
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: add some comment explaining what we can see from this visualization (i.e., "We can see that our model performs well in this dataset, due to the flat curve in the right-most part of the graph.")

+++ {"id": "M2ql0KwYJLqn"}

## Visualization Functions

> Includes utilities for:
> - Sample generation
> - Forward/reverse process visualization
> - Training progress tracking

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this section, we include utilities for:
- Sample generation
- Forward/reverse process visualization

These tools can help you track the training progress for your model.
```

I didn't see a "Training progress tracking" code cell but maybe you mean something different, such as saying that the sample generation and forward/reverse process visualization help you track the training progress. In that case I would spell it out and not add it as a bullet item.

Author: I'm adjusting part of it - As in the common Google tech writing guideline, I do prefer to keep it without the "We language".

    reverse_sequence = compute_reverse_sequence(model, forward_sequence[-1], key2, num_steps)

    # Setup visualization grid
    fig, (ax1, ax2) = plt.subplots(2, num_steps, figsize=(8, 2))
    fig.suptitle('Forward and Reverse Diffusion Process', y=1.1)

    timesteps = jnp.linspace(0, diffusion.num_steps-1, num_steps).astype(jnp.int32)

    # Visualize forward diffusion
    for i in range(num_steps):
        ax1[i].imshow(forward_sequence[i, ..., 0], cmap='binary', interpolation='gaussian')
        ax1[i].axis('off')
        ax1[i].set_title(f't={timesteps[i]}')
    ax1[0].set_ylabel('Forward', rotation=90, labelpad=10)

    # Visualize reverse diffusion
    for i in range(num_steps):
        ax2[i].imshow(reverse_sequence[i, ..., 0], cmap='binary', interpolation='gaussian')
        ax2[i].axis('off')
        ax2[i].set_title(f't={timesteps[num_steps-1-i]}')
    ax2[0].set_ylabel('Reverse', rotation=90, labelpad=10)

    plt.tight_layout()
    plt.show()

# Generate visualization
key, subkey = jax.random.split(key)
print("\nFull Forward and Reverse Process:")
plot_forward_and_reverse(model, diffusion, images_test[0], subkey)
```

+++ {"id": "o43bRWpiM6Mt"}

## Summary

> This tutorial demonstrated the implementation of a diffusion model using JAX and Flax libraries. You explored the U-Net architecture with attention mechanisms, efficient training strategies using JIT compilation, and comprehensive visualization techniques for the diffusion process. The implementation showcases JAX's powerful features for high-performance machine learning, including automatic differentiation, vectorization, and just-in-time compilation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This tutorial demonstrated the implementation of a diffusion model using JAX and Flax libraries. We explored the U-Net architecture with attention mechanisms, efficient training strategies using JIT compilation, and comprehensive visualization techniques for the diffusion process. The implementation showcases JAX's powerful features for high-performance machine learning, including automatic differentiation, vectorization, and just-in-time compilation.
```

Author: As in the common Google tech writing guideline, I do prefer to keep it without the "We language".
